Romans, make way the goodAndronicus.
Patron of virtue, Rome'sbest champion,
successful in the battlesthat he fights,
with honor and withfortune is returned
from where he circumscribedwith his sword
and brought to yoke theenemies of Rome.
Hail, Rome,
victorious in thy mourningweeds.
Lo, as the bark that hathdischarged her freight
returns with preciouslading to the bay
from whence at first sheweighed her anchorage,
cometh Andronicus, boundwith laurel boughs,
to resalute his countrywith his tears
tears of true joy for hisreturn to Rome.
Thou great defender ofthis capitol,
stand gracious to therights that we intend.
Romans of five and twentyvaliant sons,
half of the number thatKing Priam had,
behold the poor remains,alive and dead.
These that survive letRome reward with love,
these that I bring untotheir latest home
with burial amongst theirancestors.
Here Goths have given meleave to sheathe my sword.
Titus, unkind and carelessof thine own,
why sufferest thou thysons, unburied yet,
to hover on the dreadfulshore of Styx?
Make way to lay them bytheir brethren.
There greet in silence, asthe dead are wont,
and sleep in peace, slainin your country's wars.
O, sacred receptacle of myjoys,
sweet cell of virtue andnobility,
how many sons hast thou ofmine in store
that thou wilt neverrender to me more?
Give us the proudestprisoner of the Goths,
that we may hew his limbsand on a pile,
ad manes fratrum,sacrifice his flesh
before this earthy prisonof their bones
that so the shadows be notunappeased
nor we disturbed withprodigies on earth.
I give you him, thenoblest that survives,
the eldest son of thisdistressed queen.
Stay, Roman brethren!
Gracious conqueror,victorious Titus,
rue the tears I shed,
a mother's tears inpassion for her son.
And if thy sons were everdear to thee,
O, think my son to be asdear to me.
Sufficeth not that we arebrought to Rome
to beautify thy triumphsand return captive to thee
and to thy Roman yoke; butmust my sons
be slaughtered in thestreets for valiant doings
in their country's cause?
O, if to fight for kingand commonweal
were piety in thine, it isin these.
Andronicus, stain not thytomb with blood.
Wilt thou draw near thenature of the gods?
Draw near them, then, inbeing merciful.
Sweet mercy is nobility'strue badge.
Thrice noble Titus, sparemy firstborn son.
Patient yourself, madam,and pardon me.
These are their brethrenwhom your Goths beheld,
alive and dead, and fortheir brethren slain
religiously they asksacrifice.
To this, your son ismarked, and die he must,
to appease their groaningshadows that are gone.
Away with him, and make apath straight;
and with our swords, upona pile of wood,
let's hew his limbs tillthey be clean consumed.
O, cruel, irreligiouspiety!
Was never Scythia half sobarbarous?
Oppose not Scythia toambitious Rome.
Alarbus goes to rest, andwe survive
to tremble under Titus'threatening look.
And, madam, standresolved, but hope withal
the self-same gods thatarm the queen of Troy
with opportunity of sharprevenge
upon the Thracian tyrantin his tent
may favor Tamora, thequeen of Goths
when Goths were Goths andTamora was queen
to quit the bloody wrongsupon her foes.
See, lord and father, howwe have performed
our Roman rites: Alarbus'limbs are lopped,
and entrails feed thesacrificing fire,
whose smoke, like incense,doth perfume the sky.
Remaineth not but to interour brethren
and with loud larumswelcome them to Rome.
Let it be so, and letAndronicus
make this his latestfarewell to their souls.
In peace and honor restyou here, my sons.
Rome's readiest champions,repose you here in rest,
secure from worldlychances and mishaps.
Here lurks no treason;here no envy swells.
Here grow no damned drugs;here are no storms,
no noise but silence andeternal sleep.
In peace and honor restyou here, my sons.
In peace and honor liveLord Titus long.
My noble lord and father,live in fame.
Lo, at this tomb, mytributary tears I render
for my brethren'sobsequies.
And at thy feet I kneelwith tears of joy
shed on this earth for thyreturn to Rome.
O, bless me here with thyvictorious hand,
whose fortunes Rome's bestcitizens applaud.
Kind Rome, that hast thuslovingly reserved
the cordial of mine age toglad my heart.
Lavinia, live; outlive thyfather's days
and fame's eternal date,for virtue's praise.
Succession Saturninus.Succession Saturninus.
Succession Saturninus.Succession!
Noble patricians, patronsof my right,
defend the justice of mycause with arms.
And, countrymen, my lovingfollowers,
plead my successive titlewith your swords.
I am his firstborn sonthat was the last thatwear
the imperial diadem ofRome.
Then let my father'shonors live in me,
nor wrong mine age withthis indignity.
Romans, friends,followers, favorers of myright,
if ever Bassianus,Caesar's son,
were gracious in the eyesof royal Rome,
keep then this passage tothe capitol
and suffer not dishonor toapproach the imperialseat.
To virtue consecrate
to justice, continence,and nobility.
But let desert in pureelection shine
and Romans fight forfreedom in your choice.
Princes, that strive byfactions and by friends
ambitiously for rule andempery,
know that the people ofRome,
for whom we stand aspecial party,
have, by common voice inelection for the Romanempery,
chosen Andronicus,surnamed Pius
for many good and greatdesserts to Rome.
A nobler man, a braverwarrior
lives not this day withinthe city wall.
He by the senate isaccited home
from weary wars againstthe barbarous Goths
that with his sons, aterror to our foes,
hath yoked a nationstrong, trained up inarms.
Ten years are spent
since first he undertookthis cause for Rome
and chastised with armsour enemies' pride.
Five times, he hathreturned bleeding to Rome,
bearing his valiant sonsin coffins from the field.
And at this day,
to the monument of theAndronici done sacrificeof expiation
and slain the noblestprisoner of the Goths.
And now at last, ladenwith honor's spoils,
returns the goodAndronicus to Rome;
renowned Titus,flourishing in arms.
Let us entreat, by honorof his name
whom worthily you wouldhave now succeed
and in the capitol andsenate's right,
whom you pretend to honorand adore
let you withdraw you andabate your strength,
dismiss your followersand, as suitors should,
plead your desserts inpeace and humbleness.
How fair the tribunespeaks to calm mythoughts.
Marcus Andronicus, so Ido affy
in thy uprightness andintegrity,
and so I love and honorthee and thine,
thy noble brother Titusand his sons,
and her to whom my thoughts arehumbled all, rich ornament,
that I will here dismissmy loving friends
and to my fortunes and thepeople's favor
commit my cause in balanceto be weighed.
Friends that have beenthus forward in my right,
I thank you all and heredismiss you all
and to the love and favorof my country
commit myself, my person,and the cause.
Rome, be as just andgracious unto me
as I am confident and kindto thee.
Romans, and me, a poorcompetitor.
Long live Lord Titus, mybeloved brother,
gracious triumpher in theeyes of Rome.
Thanks, gentle tribune,noble brother Marcus.
And welcome, nephews, fromsuccessful wars
you that survive and youthat sleep in fame.
Titus Andronicus, thepeople of Rome,
whose friend in justicethou hast ever been,
send thee by me, theirtribune and their trust,
this palliament of whiteand spotless hue
and name you in electionfor the empery
with these, our late-deceasedemperor's sons.
Be candidatus, then, andput it on,
and help to set a head onheadless Rome.
A better head her gloriousbody fits
than his that shakes forage and feebleness.
What, should I don thisrobe and trouble you,
be chosen withproclamations today,
tomorrow yield up rule,resign my life,
and set abroad newbusiness for you all?
Rome, I have been thysoldier 40 years
and led my country'sstrength successfully
and buried one and twentyvaliant sons,
knighted in field, slainmanfully in arms,
in right and service oftheir noble country.
Give me a staff of honorfor mine age,
not a scepter to controlthe world.
Upright he held it, lords,that held it last.
Titus, thou shalt obtainand ask the empery.
Proud and ambitioustribune!
Canst thou tell?
Patience, PrinceSaturninus.
Romans, do me right!
Patricians, draw yourswords and sheath them not
till Saturninus be Rome'semperor.
Andronicus, would thouwere shipped to hell
rather than rob me of thepeople's hearts.
Proud Saturnine,interrupter of the good
that noble-minded Titusmeans to thee!
Content thee, Prince; Iwill restore
the people's hearts tothee and wean them fromthemselves.
Andronicus, I do notflatter thee
but honor thee, and willdo till I die.
My faction if thoustrengthen with thyfriends,
I will most thankful be.
And thanks to men of nobleminds is honorable meed.
People of Rome andpeople's tribunes here,
I ask your voices and yoursuffrages.
Will you bestow themfriendly on Andronicus?
To gratify the goodAndronicus
and gratulate his safereturn to Rome,
the people will acceptwhom he admits.
Tribunes, I thank you, andthis suit I make:
that you create ouremperor's eldest son, LordSaturnine,
whose virtues will, Ihope,
reflect on Rome as Titan'srays on earth
and ripen justice in thiscommonweal.
Then if you will elect bymy advice,
crown him, and say, "Longlive our emperor."
With voices and applauseof every sort,
patricians and plebeians,
we create Lord SaturninusRome's great emperor
and say, "Long live ourEmperor Saturnine."
Long live our EmperorSaturnine.
Titus Andronicus, for thyfavors done to us
in our election this day,I give thee thanks
in part of thy dessertsand will with deeds
requite thy gentleness.
And for an onset, Titus,
to advance thy name andhonorable family,
Lavinia will I make myempress,
Rome's royal mistress,mistress of my heart,
and in the sacred Pantheonher espouse.
Tell me, Andronicus, doththis motion please thee?
It doth, my worthy lord.
And in this match I holdme highly honored of YourGrace.
And here, in sight ofRome,
to Saturnine, king andcommander of ourcommonweal,
the wide world's emperor,do I consecrate my sword,
my chariot, and myprisoners,
presents well worthyRome's imperious lord.
Receive them, then, thetribute that I owe,
mine honor's ensignshumbled at thy feet.
Thanks, noble Titus,father of my life.
How proud I am of thee andof thy gifts
Rome shall record.
And when I do forget theleast of these unspeakabledesserts,
Romans, forget your fealtyto me.
Now, madam, are youprisoner to an emperor,
to him that for your honorand your state
will use you nobly andyour followers.
A goodly lady trust me,of the hue
that I would choose, wereI to choose anew.
Clear up, fair queen, thatcloudy countenance.
Though chance of war hathwrought this change ofcheer,
thou comes not to be madea scorn in Rome.
Princely shall be thyusage every way; rest onmy word.
And let not discontentdaunt all your hopes.
Madam, he comforts you canmake you greater
than the queen of Goths.
You are not displeasedwith this, Lavinia?
Not I, my lord, sith truenobility
warrants these words inprincely courtesy.
Thanks, sweet Lavinia.
Romans, let us go.
Ransomless here we set ourprisoners free.
Proclaim our honors,lords, with trump anddrum.
Lord Titus, by your leave,this maid is mine.
How, sir.
Are you in earnest, then,my lord?
Aye, noble Titus, andresolved withal
to do myself this reasonand this right.
Suum cique is our Romanjustice.
This prince in justiceseizeth but his own.
And that he will, andshall if Lucius live.
Traitors, avaunt!
Where is the emperor'sguard?
Treason, my lord! Laviniais surprised.
Surprised by whom?
By him that justly maybear his betrothed
from all the world away.
Brothers, help convey herhence away,
and with my sword, I'llkeep this door safe.
Follow, my lord, and I'llsoon bring her back.
My lord! You pass nothere.
What, villain boy!
Bar'st me my way in Rome?
Help, Lucius, help!
My lord!
You are unjust, and morethan so.
In wrongful quarrel youhave slain your son.
Nor thou nor here are anysons of mine.
My sons would never sodishonor me.
Traitor, restore Laviniato the emperor.
Dead, if you will, but notto be his wife
but as another's lawfulpromised love.
No, Titus, no.
The emperor needs her not;
nor her nor thee, nor anyof thy stock.
I'll trust by leisure himthat mocks me once;
thee never, nor thytraitorous, haughty sons,
confederates all thus todishonor me.
Was none in Rome to make astale but Saturnine?
Full well, Andronicus,
agree these deeds withthat proud brag of thine
that said'st I begged theempire at thy hands.
O, monstrous; whatreproachful words arethese?
Go thy ways; go, give thatchanging peace
to him that flourished forher with his sword.
A valiant son-in-law thoushalt enjoy,
one fit to bandy with thylawless sons,
to ruffle in thecommonwealth of Rome.
These words are razors tomy wounded heart.
I will, therefore.
Lovely Tamora, queen ofGoths,
that like the statelyPhoebe amongst her nymphs
dost overshine thegallant'st dames of Rome.
If thou be pleased withthis, my sudden choice,
behold, I choose thee,Tamora, for my bride
and will create theeempress of Rome.
Speak, queen of Goths.
Dost thou applaud mychoice?
And here I swear, by allthe Roman gods,
sith priest and holy waterare so near,
and taper burn so bright,and everything inreadiness
for Hymenaeus stand, Iwill not resalute
the streets of Rome orclimb my palace
till from forth this placeI lead espoused
my bride along with me.
And here in sight ofheaven, to Rome I swear,
if Saturnine advance thequeen of Goths,
she will a handmaid be tohis desires,
a loving nurse, a motherto his youth.
Ascend, fair queen, thePantheon.
Lords, accompany yournoble emperor and hislovely bride,
sent by the heavens forPrince Saturnine,
whose wisdom hath herfortunes conquered.
There shall we consummateour spousal rites.
I am not bid to wait uponthis bride.
Titus, when wert thou wontto walk alone,
dishonored thus, andchallenged of wrongs?
O, Titus, see; O, see whatthou hast done:
in a bad quarrel slain avirtuous son.
No, foolish tribune, no.
No son of mine, nor thou,nor these confederates
in the deed that hathdishonored all our family;
unworthy brother andunworthy sons.
But let us give himburial, as becomes.
Give Mutius burial withour brethren.
Traitors, away.
He rests not in this tomb.
This monument 500 yearshath stood
which I have sumptuouslyreedified.
Here none but soldiers andRome's servitors
repose in fame; nonebasely slain in brawls.
Bury him where you can.
He comes not here.
My lord, this is impietyin you.
My nephew Mutius' deeds doplead for him.
He must be buried with hisbrethren.
And shall, or him we willaccompany.
"And shall."
What villain was it spakethat word?
He that would vouch it inany place but here.
What, would you bury himin my despite?
No, noble Titus, butentreat of thee
to pardon Mutius and tobury him.
Marcus, even thou haststruck upon my crest,
and with these boys, minehonor thou hast wounded.
My foes I do repute youevery one.
So trouble me no more, butget you gone.
He is not with himself.
Let us withdraw.
Not I, till Mutius' bonesbe buried.
Brother, for in that namedoth nature plead
Father, and in that namedoth nature speak
Speak thou no more, if allthe rest will speed.
Renowned Titus, more thanhalf my soul
Dear father, soul andsubstance of us all
Suffer thy brother Marcus
to inter his noble nephewhere in virtue's nest
that died in honor andLavinia's cause.
Thou art a Roman; be notbarbarous.
The Greeks, upon advice,did bury Ajax that slewhimself.
And wise Laertes' son didgraciously plead hisfunerals.
Let not young Mutius,then, that was thy joy,
be barred his entrancehere.
Rise, Marcus, rise.
The dismalest day is thisthat e'er I saw,
to be dishonored by mysons in Rome.
Well, bury him, and buryme the next.
There lie thy bones, sweetMutius, with thy friends,
till we with trophies doadorn thy tomb.
No man shed tears fornoble Mutius.
He lives in fame that diedin virtue's cause.
My lord, to step out ofthese dreary dumps
How comes it that thesubtle queen of Goths
is of a sudden thusadvanced in Rome?
I know not, Marcus, but Iknow it is;
whether by device or no,the heavens can tell.
Is she not, then,beholding to the man
that brought her for thishigh good turn so far?
Yes, and will nobly himremunerate.
So Bassianus, you haveplayed your prize.
God give you joy, sir, ofyour gallant bride.
And you of yours, my lord.
I say no more, nor wish noless.
And so I take my leave.
Traitor!
If Rome have law or wehave power,
thou and thy faction shallrepent this rape.
Rape call you it, my lord,to seize my own,
my true betrothed love,and now my wife?
But let the laws of Romedetermine all.
Meanwhile am I possessedof that is mine.
'Tis good, sir; you arevery short with us.
But if we live, we'll beas sharp with you.
My lord, what I have done,as best I may,
answer I must, and shalldo with my life.
Only thus much I give YourGrace to know:
by all the duties that Iowe to Rome,
this noble gentleman, LordTitus here,
is in opinion and in honorwronged;
that in the rescue ofLavinia with his own hand
did slay his youngest sonin zeal to you
and highly moved to wrathto be controlled
in that he frankly gave.
Receive him then to favor,Saturnine,
that hath expressedhimself in all his deeds
a father and a friend tothee and Rome.
Prince Bassianus, leave toplead my deeds.
'Tis thou and these thathath dishonored me.
Rome and the righteousheavens be my judge
how I have loved andhonored Saturnine.
My worthy lord, if everTamora were gracious
in those princely eyes ofthine, then hear me speak
indifferently for all, andat my suit, sweet,
pardon what has passed.
What, madam, be dishonoredopenly
and basely put it upwithout revenge?
Not so, my lord.
The gods of Rome forfend
I should be author todishonor you.
But on mine honor may Iundertake
for good Lord Titus'innocence in all,
whose fury not dissembledspeaks his griefs.
And at my suit, lookgraciously on him.
Lose not so noble a friendon vain suppose,
nor with sour looksafflict his gentle heart.
My lord, be ruled by me.
Be won at last.
Dissemble all your griefsand discontents.
You are but newly plantedin your throne.
Lest then the people andpatricians too
upon a just survey takeTitus' part,
and so supplant you foringratitude
which Rome reputes to be aheinous sin
yield at entreats, andthen let me alone.
I'll find a day tomassacre them all
and raise their factionand their family,
the cruel father and histraitorous sons
to whom I sued for my dearson's life,
and make them know what'tis to let a queen
kneel in the streets andbeg for grace in vain.
Come, come, sweet emperor.
Come, Andronicus.
Take up this good old man,and cheer the heart
that dies in tempest ofthy angry frown.
Rise, Titus, rise.
My empress hath prevailed.
I thank Your Majesty andher, my lord.
These words, these looksinfuse new life in me.
Titus, I am incorporate inRome,
a Roman now adoptedhappily.
I must advise the emperorfor his good.
This day, all quarrelsdie, Andronicus.
And let it me mine honor,good my lord,
that I have reconciledyour friends and you.
For you, Prince Bassianus,
I have passed my word andpromise to the emperor
that you will be more mildand tractable.
And fear not, lords, andyou, Lavinia.
By my advice, all humbledon your knees,
you shall ask pardon ofHis Majesty.
We do, and vow to heavenand to His Highness
that what we did was,mildly as we might,
tendering our sister'shonor and our own.
That, on mine honor, heredo I protest.
Away, and talk not;trouble us no more.
Nay, nay, sweet emperor.
We must all be friends.
The tribune and hisnephews kneel for grace.
I will not be denied.
Sweet heart, look back.
Marcus, for thy sake andthy brother's here,
and at my lovely Tamora'sentreats,
I do remit these youngmen's heinous faults.
Stand up.
Lavinia, though you leftme like a churl,
I found a friend.
And sure as death, I swore
I would not part abachelor from the priest.
Come, if the emperor'scourt can feast twobrides,
you are my guest, Lavinia,and your friends.
This day shall be a loveday, Tamora.
Tomorrow, and it pleaseYour Majesty
to hunt the panther and ahart with me,
with horn and hound, we'llgive Your Grace bonjour.
Be it so, Titus, andgramercy too.